Project_Proposal.md, before:

BioMagick
=========
### A next generation bioinformatics file format converter and sequence feature extractor.    


## Introduction

### Next Generation Sequencing

![Cost of sequencing in the past decade.](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b7/DNA_Sequencing_Cost_per_Genome_Over_Time.jpg/380px-DNA_Sequencing_Cost_per_Genome_Over_Time.jpg)

With the democratization of [next generation sequencing (NGS)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DNA_sequencing#Next-generation_methods) technologies over the past decade the cost of sequencing an organism's genome is dropping drastically and therefore sequencing is an ever increasingly attractive analytical method for biologist everywhere. The amount of sequencing data being generated is also increasing due to NGS technologies outputting tens of gigabytes of data per run. To counter act this new torrent of data computational biologists and bioinformaticians have begun to develop bioinformatics pipelines.

### Bioinformatics Pipelines

![Example bioinformatics pipeline.](http://www.broadinstitute.org/~bhaas/euk_annot_pipeline.png)

Bioinformatics pipelines are designed to automate the process of processing, filtering and analyzing sequencing data. They often consist for several command line tools pipelined together with shell scripts or build creation tools such a [GNU Make](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Make_(software). The output from one bioinformatics tool is piped to another with each step transforming the sequence data into a more useful form. Often each tool in the pipeline was developed to act alone and therefore creates inputs and outputs incompatible with other tools in the system. As a result "glue" code has to be developed in order to transform the output from one bioinformatics tool into an input compatible with another.

### Bioinformatics Libraries

Several open source bioinformatics libraries have been created over the past three decades in order to simplify the creation of customer bioinformatics software. The two most prominent examples are [Biopython](http://biopython.org/wiki/Main_Page) and the legacy [BioPerl](http://www.bioperl.org/wiki/Main_Page) although other libraries have been created or are being created such as [BioJava](http://biojava.org/wiki/Main_Page), [BioRuby](http://bioruby.org), and [Bionode](http://bionode.github.io/bionode-website/). There are also variety of C/C++ libraries both new and old. Often classes from these libraries are incorporated into simple scripts that transform one bioinformatics format to another, extract certain sequence features (for example protein coding genes) or provide the computational biologists with simple stats about their sequence data. These small scripts are integrated into larger bioinformatics pipelines to act as the "glue code".

#### BioMagick will be designed to replace these scripts with a universal sequence conversion program built on top of open source libraries and possessing an elegant [command line user interface (CLI)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Command-line_interface).                

## Motivation

##### Current Standard

The current standard for converting bioinformatics formats is writing your own scripts using classes from Biopython or BioPerl, which take care of file parsing and conversion. Unexperienced biologists often end up with the "one script per conversion" phenomenon thus resulting in them having to maintain hundreds of one-off scripts created by themselves or passed along to them by their co-workers. ([here is an example repository](https://github.com/carden24/Bioinformatics_scripts)). In addition, biologists often rush the creation of these scripts so they can move on to analyzing the biology. This often leads to conversion errors which may skew a researchers results. 

As the amount of biological sequence data is exponentially increasing, computational biologists are starting to move towards automated bioinformatics pipelines. However, building these pipelines off of a series of custom conversion scripts (often with the exact same internal data flow) is ultimately unsustainable and as a result an integrated bioinformatics format cross-conversion tool is needed.  

##### Existing Programs

A variety of bioinformatics cross-conversion programs have a been developed in the past however all have failed to obtain significant usage. These programs all have the following characteristics:

- Limited number input/output of file formats
- Can only take one input file at a time
- Unintuitive and/or non-[POSIX](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/POSIX) CLI
- Were built using "older" programming languages such as C, Java or Shell in a unmaintainable way
- Do not utilize existing open-source libraries that are modern and maintained
- Generally do not auto-recognize the input file format  
 
All of the bioinformatics file format conversion programs that the author has identified have either been web applications which can only covert the contents of a single text file that has been copy-pasted into a web form and sent to a sever for conversion or command line programs which are no longer maintain or have lost availability. There are no programs based on modern Bioinformatics libraries. Finally most conversion programs have little to no documentation.

##### Inspiration

The primary inspiration for BioMagick is the [ImageMagick](http://www.imagemagick.org) command line bitmap image processing suite. In a similar manner to ImageMagick, BioMagick will facilitate the cross-conversion between of a verity of bioinformatics file formats through a single command line interface.      

## Project Summary

BioMagick will be a next generation bioinformatics file format converter and sequence feature extractor built from Biopython's [SeqIO](http://biopython.org/wiki/SeqIO), [AlignIO](http://biopython.org/wiki/AlignIO), [Phylo](http://biopython.org/wiki/Phylo) classes. It will contain a class for auto-recognition of text based Bioinformatics formats. It will also posses value added features such as the ability to extract sequence features such as protein coding or 16s rRNA genes and the ability to display certain statistics about an input file, for example how many DNA sequences are contained within. The command line user interface (CLI) will be POSIX/GNU standard and will allow piped input from other UNIX programs and the input of multiple files. Automated tests will be created to validate that BioMagick is providing the correct output. Documentation will be in the form of a Github wiki and a UNIX Man page. BioMagick will be open source and released under [MIT License](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MIT_License).

## Project Details

### Architecture and Environment

##### Languages and Platforms

BioMagick will be designed to be run on [LINUX](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linux) and [Mac OSX](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OS_X). The programming language we will use is [Python](https://www.python.org) and we will support the following Python interpreters:

- CPython 2.6, 2.7, 3.3, 3.4 -- see [http://www.python.org](http://www.python.org)

- PyPy 2.0, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3 -- see [http://www.pypy.org](http://www.pypy.org)

We will also support the Python 2.7 and Python 3.0-3.4 versions of the Python language. Do to Python being an interpreted language, BioMagick should run on most hardware platforms supported by Linux (x86, Power, ARM etc.). However, our testing will only guarantee full functionality on [x86 hardware](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X86) (Intel and AMD)

##### Biopython

A core component of BioMagick will be the [Biopython](http://biopython.org/wiki/Main_Page) library. Specifically, the [SeqIO](http://biopython.org/wiki/SeqIO), [AlignIO](http://biopython.org/wiki/AlignIO), [Phylo](http://biopython.org/wiki/Phylo) classes from Biopython will be heavily utilized for parsing, converting and writing bioinformatics file formats. They can also be used for various other tasks  such as extracting protein coding genes.

Some useful Biopython features:

- A generic sequence record object for storing genomic sequences along with their features (for example the position of genes within the sequence).
- Parsers for various bioinformatics file formats and storing them as sequence record objects.
- Writers for serializing sequence record objects into various bioinformatic file formats.

######  Biopython code example #1:

	from Bio import SeqIO
	handle = open("example.fasta", "rU") # Opens a file handle.	
	
	# Parses input file which contains mutiple FASTA formated sequences.
	# Parses each FASTA formated sequence into a generic sequence record object.
	for record in SeqIO.parse(handle, "fasta") : 
    	print record.id # Prints the id of each sequence.
	handle.close()

######  Biopython code example #2:

	from Bio import SeqIO
	input_handle = open("cor6_6.gb", "rU") 
	output_handle = open("cor6_6.fasta", "w")
	
	# Parses each Genbank file into a generic sequence record object.
	sequences = SeqIO.parse(input_handle, "genbank") # Opens a file handle.
	
	# Write sequence record objects to file in FASTA format.
	SeqIO.write(sequences, output_handle, "fasta")
 
	output_handle.close()
	input_handle.close()
	
The author has used Biopython in the past to create software systems. Here are some examples:

- [Genbank-Downloaders](https://github.com/LeeBergstrand/Genbank-Downloaders) - A series of small Biopython scripts for downloading sequence data off NCBI's Genbank.
- [BackBLAST_Reciprocal_BLAST](https://github.com/LeeBergstrand/BackBLAST_Reciprocal_BLAST) -  A reciprocal BLAST program for filtering down BLAST results to best bidirectional hits. 
- [HMMER-DB](https://github.com/LeeBergstrand/HMMER-DB) - A program for searching, extracting and storing proteins that match specific Hidden Markov Models created by HMMER.

##### Automatic Identification of Bioinformatic File Formats.

One of the features the author seeks to include into BioMagick is the ability to automatically recognize textual bioinformatics file formats. Once identified the file type of an input file would be passed on to Biopython. Automatic identification of file format is not included in Biopython. When using the SeqIO class one has to explicitly identify input file  type. This was a conscious decision by Biopython's creators. 

[BioPerl's SeqIO](http://bioperl.org/wiki/HOWTO:SeqIO) class (the Perl equivalent to Biopython's SeqIO class) is capable of automatically identifying a limited set of input file types. For identification of file type one could reverse engineer BioPerl's SeqIO classes's methodologies for identifying file type or perhaps take a more generic approach by using a library like [libmagic](http://linux.die.net/man/3/libmagic) to identify the input file.

##### Command Line Interface Libraries

A command line library will be used to parse user input. Some possible libraries are [Clint](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/clint/), [Click](http://click.pocoo.org/3/) or [Cliff](http://cliff.readthedocs.org/en/latest/).

### Implementation Issues and Challenges
### Deliverables
### Timeline

## Conclusion

## References

Commit message:

Updates to proposal. Added data flow diagram.

Project_Proposal.md, after:

BioMagick
=========
### A next generation bioinformatics file format converter and sequence feature extractor.    


## Introduction

### Next Generation Sequencing

![Cost of sequencing in the past decade.](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b7/DNA_Sequencing_Cost_per_Genome_Over_Time.jpg/380px-DNA_Sequencing_Cost_per_Genome_Over_Time.jpg)

With the democratization of [next generation sequencing (NGS)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DNA_sequencing#Next-generation_methods) technologies over the past decade the cost of sequencing an organism's genome is dropping drastically and therefore sequencing is an ever increasingly attractive analytical method for biologist everywhere. The amount of sequencing data being generated is also increasing due to NGS technologies outputting tens of gigabytes of data per run. To counter act this new torrent of data computational biologists and bioinformaticians have begun to develop bioinformatics pipelines.

### Bioinformatics Pipelines

![Example bioinformatics pipeline.](http://www.broadinstitute.org/~bhaas/euk_annot_pipeline.png)

Bioinformatics pipelines are designed to automate the process of processing, filtering and analyzing sequencing data. They often consist for several command line tools pipelined together with shell scripts or build creation tools such a [GNU Make](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Make_(software). The output from one bioinformatics tool is piped to another with each step transforming the sequence data into a more useful form. Often each tool in the pipeline was developed to act alone and therefore creates inputs and outputs incompatible with other tools in the system. As a result "glue" code has to be developed in order to transform the output from one bioinformatics tool into an input compatible with another.

### Bioinformatics Libraries

Several open source bioinformatics libraries have been created over the past three decades in order to simplify the creation of customer bioinformatics software. The two most prominent examples are [Biopython](http://biopython.org/wiki/Main_Page) and the legacy [BioPerl](http://www.bioperl.org/wiki/Main_Page) although other libraries have been created or are being created such as [BioJava](http://biojava.org/wiki/Main_Page), [BioRuby](http://bioruby.org), and [Bionode](http://bionode.github.io/bionode-website/). There are also variety of C/C++ libraries both new and old. Often classes from these libraries are incorporated into simple scripts that transform one bioinformatics format to another, extract certain sequence features (for example protein coding genes) or provide the computational biologists with simple stats about their sequence data. These small scripts are integrated into larger bioinformatics pipelines to act as the "glue code".

#### BioMagick will be designed to replace these scripts with a universal sequence conversion program built on top of open source libraries and possessing an elegant [command line user interface (CLI)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Command-line_interface).                

## Motivation

##### Current Standard

The current standard for converting bioinformatics formats is writing your own scripts using classes from Biopython or BioPerl, which take care of file parsing and conversion. Unexperienced biologists often end up with the "one script per conversion" phenomenon thus resulting in them having to maintain hundreds of one-off scripts created by themselves or passed along to them by their co-workers. ([here is an example repository](https://github.com/carden24/Bioinformatics_scripts)). In addition, biologists often rush the creation of these scripts so they can move on to analyzing the biology. This often leads to conversion errors which may skew a researchers results. 

As the amount of biological sequence data is exponentially increasing, computational biologists are starting to move towards automated bioinformatics pipelines. However, building these pipelines off of a series of custom conversion scripts (often with the exact same internal data flow) is ultimately unsustainable and as a result an integrated bioinformatics format cross-conversion tool is needed.  

##### Existing Programs

A variety of bioinformatics cross-conversion programs have a been developed in the past however all have failed to obtain significant usage. These programs all have the following characteristics:

- Limited number input/output of file formats
- Can only take one input file at a time
- Unintuitive and/or non-[POSIX](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/POSIX) CLI
- Were built using "older" programming languages such as C, Java or Shell in a unmaintainable way
- Do not utilize existing open-source libraries that are modern and maintained
- Generally do not auto-recognize the input file format  
 
All of the bioinformatics file format conversion programs that the author has identified have either been web applications which can only covert the contents of a single text file that has been copy-pasted into a web form and sent to a sever for conversion or command line programs which are no longer maintain or have lost availability. There are no programs based on modern Bioinformatics libraries. Finally most conversion programs have little to no documentation.

##### Inspiration

The primary inspiration for BioMagick is the [ImageMagick](http://www.imagemagick.org) command line bitmap image processing suite. In a similar manner to ImageMagick, BioMagick will facilitate the cross-conversion between of a verity of bioinformatics file formats through a single command line interface.      

## Project Summary

BioMagick will be a next generation bioinformatics file format converter and sequence feature extractor built from Biopython's [SeqIO](http://biopython.org/wiki/SeqIO), [AlignIO](http://biopython.org/wiki/AlignIO), [Phylo](http://biopython.org/wiki/Phylo) classes. It will contain a class for auto-recognition of text based Bioinformatics formats. It will also posses value added features such as the ability to extract sequence features such as protein coding or 16s rRNA genes and the ability to display certain statistics about an input file, for example how many DNA sequences are contained within. The command line user interface (CLI) will be POSIX/GNU standard and will allow piped input from other UNIX programs and the input of multiple files. Automated tests will be created to validate that BioMagick is providing the correct output. Documentation will be in the form of a Github wiki and a UNIX Man page. BioMagick will be open source and released under [MIT License](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MIT_License).

## Project Details

### Architecture and Environment

##### Languages and Platforms

BioMagick will be designed to be run on [LINUX](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linux) and [Mac OSX](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OS_X). The programming language we will use is [Python](https://www.python.org) and we will support the following Python interpreters:

- CPython 2.6, 2.7, 3.3, 3.4 -- see [http://www.python.org](http://www.python.org)

- PyPy 2.0, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3 -- see [http://www.pypy.org](http://www.pypy.org)

We will also support the Python 2.7 and Python 3.0-3.4 versions of the Python language. Do to Python being an interpreted language, BioMagick should run on most hardware platforms supported by Linux (x86, Power, ARM etc.). However, our testing will only guarantee full functionality on [x86 hardware](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X86) (Intel and AMD)

##### Biopython

A core component of BioMagick will be the [Biopython](http://biopython.org/wiki/Main_Page) library. Specifically, the [SeqIO](http://biopython.org/wiki/SeqIO), [AlignIO](http://biopython.org/wiki/AlignIO), [Phylo](http://biopython.org/wiki/Phylo) classes from Biopython will be heavily utilized for parsing, converting and writing bioinformatics file formats. They can also be used for various other tasks  such as extracting protein coding genes.

Some useful Biopython features:

- A generic sequence record object for storing genomic sequences along with their features (for example the position of genes within the sequence).
- Parsers for various bioinformatics file formats and storing them as sequence record objects.
- Writers for serializing sequence record objects into various bioinformatic file formats.

######  Biopython code example #1:

	from Bio import SeqIO
	handle = open("example.fasta", "rU") # Opens a file handle.	
	
	# Parses input file which contains mutiple FASTA formated sequences.
	# Parses each FASTA formated sequence into a generic sequence record object.
	for record in SeqIO.parse(handle, "fasta") : 
    	print record.id # Prints the id of each sequence.
	handle.close()

######  Biopython code example #2:

	from Bio import SeqIO
	input_handle = open("cor6_6.gb", "rU") 
	output_handle = open("cor6_6.fasta", "w")
	
	# Parses each Genbank file into a generic sequence record object.
	sequences = SeqIO.parse(input_handle, "genbank") # Opens a file handle.
	
	# Write sequence record objects to file in FASTA format.
	SeqIO.write(sequences, output_handle, "fasta")
 
	output_handle.close()
	input_handle.close()
	
The author has used Biopython to create software systems in the past. Here are some examples:

- [Genbank-Downloaders](https://github.com/LeeBergstrand/Genbank-Downloaders) - A series of small Biopython scripts for downloading sequence data off NCBI's Genbank.
- [BackBLAST_Reciprocal_BLAST](https://github.com/LeeBergstrand/BackBLAST_Reciprocal_BLAST) -  A reciprocal BLAST program for filtering down BLAST results to best bidirectional hits. 
- [HMMER-DB](https://github.com/LeeBergstrand/HMMER-DB) - A program for searching, extracting and storing proteins that match specific Hidden Markov Models created by HMMER.

##### Automatic Identification of Bioinformatic File Formats.

One of the features the author seeks to include into BioMagick is the ability to automatically recognize textual bioinformatics file formats. Once identified the file type of an input file would be passed on to Biopython. Automatic identification of file format is not included in Biopython. When using the SeqIO class one has to explicitly identify input file  type. This was a conscious decision by Biopython's creators. 

[BioPerl's SeqIO](http://bioperl.org/wiki/HOWTO:SeqIO) class (the Perl equivalent to Biopython's SeqIO class) is capable of automatically identifying a limited set of input file types. For identification of file type one could reverse engineer BioPerl's SeqIO classes's methodologies for identifying file type or perhaps take a more generic approach by using a library like [libmagic](http://linux.die.net/man/3/libmagic) to identify the input file.

##### Command Line Interface Libraries

A command line library will be used to parse user input. Some possible libraries are [Clint](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/clint/), [Click](http://click.pocoo.org/3/) or [Cliff](http://cliff.readthedocs.org/en/latest/).

##### Architecture

###### Generalized Data Flow Diagram



### Implementation Issues and Challenges
### Deliverables
### Timeline

## Conclusion

## References
